Title: [Parisi]Abstract_Sex
MLA Citation: Parisi, Luciana. "Index." Abstract Sex: Philosophy, Biotechnology and the Mutations of Desire. London: Continuum, 2004. 222–227. Transversals. Bloomsbury Collections. Web. 6 Nov. 2022.
In 1985, Donna Haraway’s Cyborg Manifesto highlighted the new mutations of the body–sex in bio-informatic capitalism.***pg7
Far from reflecting a given unquestionable truth, the cyborg revealed that the natural essence of a body rather derives from specific historical and cultural constructions (or representations) of nature establishing a natural association between feminine sex and sexual reproduction.***pg8
Drawing on an alternative conception of nature, abstract sex embraces the Spinozist hypothesis about the indeterminate power (or abstract potential) of a body suggesting that ‘we do not yet know what a body can do’. This hypothesis challenges the analogy between biological forms and functions (the pre-established biological possibilities of a body) pointing to the capacities of variation of a body in relation to the continual mutations of nature.***pg10
As opposed to the dominant model of pleasure defined by auto-eroticism (the channelling of flows towards climax or the accumulation and release of energy), abstract sex points to a desire that is not animated or driven by predetermined goals. As explained later in this chapter, desire is autonomous from the subject and the object as it primarily entails a non-discharging distribution of energy, a ceaseless flowing that links together the most indifferent of bodies, particles, forces and signs.***pg12
As Deleuze and Guattari argue, inspired by Henri Bergson, the virtual is not to be confused with the realm of the possible.***pg14
Spinoza points to the parallel multiplicities of being and becoming, the continual relations between the cosmos and nature, intensity and extension, mind and body that define the primacy of potential over possible matter. Abstract matter questions the philosophical tradition that separates the corporeal from the incorporeal, nature from culture, the organic from the technical.***pg15
Drawing on Deleuze and Guattari, a machine is above all defined by a mixture of biological, technical, social, economic and desiring elements that compose and decompose a body at certain speeds and according to given gradients. These mixtures are productive concatenations or machinic assemblages constituting for example the biocultural organization of the body (the disciplinary order of human sex established by the virtual links between psychoanalysis, anatomy, evolutionary biology and thermodynamics) that unleash a potential transformation of all the elements participating in the composition (the transformation of evolutionary theories, the laws of physics and the anatomical perception of the body–sex).***pg15
The Darwinian logic of evolution, resting on the centrality of sexual reproduction in order to engender species variations or differences, is substituted with a rhizomatic recombination of information expanding through viral hijacking of codes between singular machines of reproduction: a microbe and an insect, a bud and a flower, a toxin and a human.***pg16
abstract sex extends the feminist politics of desire by mapping the transversal mixing of information between bodies of all sorts (bacteria, vegetables, animals, humans and technical machines). Abstract sex proposes to tap into the kinetic ethology of tiny sexes that lay out a micropolitics of symbiotic relations between different levels of mutation of matter and desire.***pg17
Abstract sex is a machinic concept that is not full of meanings, but is above all full of potential variations of the body. These variations emerge from a concatenation of small causes unleashing vast indirect effects that lead to a new conception and perception of sex. Concepts are operators of forces whose deployment is not related to the realm of possibilities, but to the plane of invention of a new kind of reality.***pg17
Stratification entails the auto-organization of molecular elements (unstructured particles) into molar compounds (structured aggregates) unfolding the isomorphic process of production of strata (the genetic and cellular strata, the multicellular and social strata).***pg18
Forms are modes of coding and decoding matter entailing the organization of elements–particles into signs: a-semiotic encodings (RNA, DNA, proteins), semiotic signs (cultural signs such as gestures, sound–words, attitudes), signs of signification (the signifier).***pg19
Deleuze and Guattari adopt Louis Hjelmslev’s distinction of matter, content and expression, form and substance from semiotic substances (signifiers) in order to define stratification through the autonomy of matter, particles and signs from signifying semiologies. Different from the Saussurean and post-Saussurean structures of signification, Hjelmslev’s study of unformed matter – the amorphous thought-matter or purport – breaks with the form–content dualism, but also with the signifier/signified duality. These structures of signification are self-referential and reduce the world of signs to words produced by a nega- tive binarism between already determinate terms. They presuppose the primacy of universal signifiers over processes of composition and trans-formation of signs. As Deleuze and Guattari argue, Hjelmslev’s linguistics provides new insights in the formation of signs as related to unformed flows: a field of algebraic signs (or immanent glossematics) liberated from the transcendent surveillance of the signifier. The plasticity of signs deploys the primacy of the mutual relationship between expression and content of matter over the relation of subordination between signifier and signified.***pg19
This continual movement unleashes the unpredictable potential of a body to mutate (differential difference) through the micro variations of sex: ‘lines of flight or destratification’ of desire from all layers of organization.***pg21
singularity: the long-term tendency of a trajectory in a physical system that individuates or actualizes through the transduction (conversion) of information from one layer to another, from one stratum to another. As Gilbert Simondon argues (1992: 313), transduction denotes an activity of individuation of a physical, biological, mental or social process emerging from the metastable relations between two disparate realities (the pre-individual state of being and the individuated state of becoming). Transduction explains the non-linear dynamics of connection between strata defined by their potential capacity to affect and being affected (to impact and being impacted) by singular levels of actualization of a body–sex.***pg21
we distinguish three major strata: the physiochemical, organic, and anthropomorphic (or alloplastic). Deleuze and Guattari (1987: 502)***pg21
this metacommunication between strata lays out the non-linear or endosymbiotic connection between the multicellular organization of the sexed body, the disciplinary sexed/gendered body and the cyborg, exposing the continual mutations of a body–sex.***pg22
Sex is constituted by assemblages of microbodies that hyperlink the most divergent forms and functions of reproduction.***pg22
The biophysical organization of sex questions the accounts of a human-centred evolution that assimilates sex to sexual reproduction and sexual organs determining the progressive evolution of the body – from bacteria to humans – and sex – from unicellular to multicellular sex.***pg22
As opposed to Darwinian and neo-Darwinian evolution that defines natural selection as the hand of God able to order nature by exterminating non-adapted species or genes, the process of stratification exposes the autonomous emergence of networked relations between codes and milieus, where selective pressures act upon molecular particle-flows able to engender new aggregations.***pg22
The biophysical order of matter is not dictated by a transcendent force of abolition, but emerges autonomously out of collective assemblages where particle-forces collide at the edge of chaos.***pg23
The understanding of this composition is indebted to Lynn Margulis’s theory of endosymbiosis that suggests a rhizomatic conception of the evolution of sex proceeding by contagion rather than filiation.***pg23
the sadist eroticism of disciplinary society.***pg24
this sadist machine of sex governed by the entanglement between sex and death only defines one of the aggregates of desire–power or machines of sex that constitute the multifaceted layers of the biocultural stratum.***pg24
physics of thermodynamics, the biology of variation in evolutionary theory***pg24
compulsive death (localized in the woman’s pathologies of sex and sexual reproduction)***pg24
The disciplinary obsession with regulating excessive flows, normalizing sexual behaviour and correcting perversions is of a different order of desire compared to masochist parthenogenesis. The last, as Deleuze argues, rejects the law of the phallus and sexual filiation, the identification of sex with genitality (1989a). Insofar as sadism defines the disciplinary biopower of the body–sex, masochism exposes the composition of a non-genital desire independent of disciplinary processes of reproduction and filiation: flows escaping stability, energy running towards dissipation, species mutations, instruments and machines of reproduction (producing new audio-visual perception).***pg24
the masochist machines of parthenogenesis – ante-posing variations to linear repetition – entangle non-filiative sex with inorganic reproduction beyond the entropic principle of pleasure. The impact of entropic dynamics of equilibrium on the reproduction of information introduces a new perception and conception of the body–sex on the biocultural stratum where the mutations of desire exceed the discursive representations of sex.***pg25
No longer do sexual reproduction and the sexed body determine the model of reproduction and communication of energy–information. The biodigital order does not rely on the extraction of surplus value of codes and the suppression of fluid forces, but on the recombination of excessive flows, modulating their microvariations into fluxes – laminar flows.***pg25
Bio-informatic capitalism, thus, marks the threshold towards a new recombination of information transmission: the engineering of all useless flows at far from equilibrium conditions producing unprecedented forms of capitalization.***pg25
According to Deleuze, the disappearance of disciplinary walls has not dissipated bio-disciplinary power, but has extended its effects onto the microscales of the body–culture, body–politics and body–desire.***pg26
Short-term investments in molecular information outside the logic of linear reproduction enable bio-informatic capital to overcome the limits of death, turning organic finitude into indefinite recombination.***pg26
Genetic engineering and cybercommunication are the new channels of capitalization that connect turbulent flows of information to flows of money.***pg26
The process of stratification suggests that the materiality of a body–sex is defined neither by a given essence nor by socio-cultural conditions. A body is composed and decomposed by the activity of molecules and particles, forces and energies. It is not simply biological or cultural. A body is defined by metastable relations between microcellular and multicellular bodies, the bodies of animals and humans, the bodies of society and technological bodies merging and unleashing new mutating compositions (differential difference). Deleuze and Guattari suggest that a body arises from the collision of pre-individual particle-forces or collectivities. These are not the properties of the transcendent Being creating extended bodies while remaining itself un-extended. Rather, they are themselves bodies constituting an intensive matrix of singular actualizations. Every actualization entails a prior metastable state, ‘the existence of a ‘‘disparateness’’ such as at least two orders of magnitude or two scales of heterogeneous reality between which potentials are distributed’ (Simondon 1992: 246).***pg27
Actualizations unfold the differential degrees of power (intensive potentia) of a body, a genetic body, a cellular body, a multicellular body, a social body, a cultural body and a cloned body. Rather than to a predeterminate cause, these bodies are linked to ‘quasi or meta causes’ unfolding the capacity of a body to enter a new composition by precluding the body to acquire definite forms and functions. This preclusion does not suggest that the power of a body is relative as established by the logic of identity absorbing all potentials into predeterminate power. The power of a body is not exhausted by the power of existing but is connected to an intensive body that is productive (produces new bodies) and comprehensive (comprehends of all that is produced).***pg28
The postmodern analysis of the body as no longer shaped by modern technoscientific discourses (organic biology and evolution of the species), fails to explain the biodigital mutations of sex involving intensive–extensive variations rather than a shift from one discourse about the body to another. In order to analyse these mutations without dismissing the potential of the body, it is necessary to apply an ontology of co-causal relations (non-linear feedback between causes and effects) rather than reiterating a given unity. These relations will enable us to map the mutations of a body–sex through the plasticity of material signs rather than signification, singularity rather than specificity, abstraction rather than generalities. This ontology requires the elaboration of abstract materialism (a symbiotic and multifaceted matter) as a method that unpacks the connecting layers of composition of a body: the continual variations of matter. Abstract materialism does not involve the analogy between the general (ideal) and the particular (individual) body or between pluralistic (many) and specific (one) categories of the body defined by the principles of identity (analogy between inert nature and body).***pg28
Abstract materialism entails the symbiotic networks between the most disparate bodies where singular layers of composition constitute a mutating essence of a body. As opposed to biologism, organicism or existentialism, this essence is linked to the far-from-equilibrium dynamics of matter: the emergence of unpredictable mutations generating from the auto-assemblage of diverse bodies.***pg29
A body is primarily defined by associations and splittings of particles and forces defining its immanent trajectories of transformation: longitudinal and latitudinal lines intersecting at every point.***pg29
capacity to affect and be affected (intensity)***pg29
According to Descartes a body is not capable of thinking. The body is extension. The mind pertains to the divine un-extended substance that is transcendent to the body–nature–matter. This substance is a God invested with the power of a tyrant (potestas) that masters the body, setting order in nature through the taxonomic organization of the body in species, classes, sexes. This God is external to nature. It creates bodies but it is not composed of bodies. It does not comprehend the mutations of a body because it is of another world, the spiritual world without matter opposing the active mind to the passive body. This God is imbued with an exterior power of selection that determines the essence of a body according to the capacity of the mind to transcend the world of bodily passions, the chaotic and contaminated world of nature. Hence essence is measured through the mental power to disembody from matter that distinguishes the animal from the human body and constrains the reproductive body (the female body) to a lower degree of power determined by its dependency on matter.***pg29
Spinoza explains that the Cartesian conception of un-extended substance is rooted in the Judaeo-Christian moralist God, detaching nature from cosmos by negating the participation of God in nature and of extended bodies in God.***pg30
Spinoza argues that God has no potestas but only potentia corresponding to an indeterminate power to produce and be produced by bodies. This God is inseparable from nature (Ethics I, D. 3). Not only is it extended, but also its power (potentia) coincides with the extension of nature. This is a continuum rather than a dualism: a ‘machinic phylum’ of matrices and bodies without transcendent control or mastering.***pg30
Nature is a dynamical and collective ecosystem of intensive and extensive bodies – growth. Natura Naturans indicates the activity of nature, the intensive capacity to produce. Natura Naturata implies the passivity of being produced. Nature exposes the coexistence of the process of producing while being produced where an infinity of attributes (expressing a multiplicity of essence or potential qualities that are not identical to God) unfolds a unity without equivalence (continuum) between the essence of substance and the essence of modes.***pg30
For Spinoza, all power is inseparable from a capacity to affect (potentia) and a capacity of being affected constituting the mutating essence of substance corre-
sponding to the essence of modes (affections of a substance). All modes are thus constituted by a mode of thinking and exten- sion, mind and body involving dynamics of affect and velocities of composition between particle-forces: the molecules composing a microbe, the microbes composing a human, the populations of cultures composing a society are all modes of an engineering nature.***pg30
Once essence (potentia) passes into existence to become a modal essence then it is defined as conatus or appetite (Ethics, III, 7) as intensive power tends to persevere by enduring and maximizing its capacity to be affected by other existing modes.***pg31
Affects entail the colliding of particle-forces delineating the impact of one body on another: the passion of the body–mind, the capacity to feel before subjective emotion.***pg31
It always emerges out of infinite sets of affects entering into relation of movement or rest, turmoil or stationary state. As Deleuze underlines, conatus conveys ‘an affirmative conception of essence: the degree of power as an affirmation of essence in God; the conatus as an affirmation of essence in existence’ (1988c: 102). Conatus defines an abstract essence spreading through non-linear relations between intensive and extensive modes where not only can a body not be separated from the mind but also all extended bodies from God (potential affect). This essence exposes a machinic composition of a mode, whose power relies upon a continual colliding with other modes marking new degrees of mutation of a given assemblage.***pg32
Desire is not in the subject, but the machine in desire – with the residual subject off to the side, alongside the machine, around the entire periphery, a parasite of machines, an accessory of vertebro-machinate desire. Deleuze and Guattari (1983: 285)***pg32
In her work, Luce Irigaray questions the economy of representation founded on the transcendent conception of matter and the binarism of sex.32 In her re-conceptualization of femininity, sex is not determined by the biological form and function of sexual organs, but becomes a fluid dimension of a matter–matrix that is autonomous from the law of filiation.***pg33
Irigaray opposes the Freudian theory of entropic pleasure to multi-directional flows escaping the constancy of reproduction and exposing the turbo-dynamics of a matter–matrix, a feminine sex outside all claims of identity. Fluid dynamics defines a body not by its achieved forms and functions (identity) but by its processes of composition and transformation that exhibit the metamorphosis of fluids able to acquire any shape. This metamorphic body–sex is not regulated by the cycle of accumulation and discharge, but displays a ceaseless flow of desire that leaks out of genitality and genealogy.***pg33
For recent feminist cultural theorists, the tradition of essentialism also constitutes the ultimate spectre of the metaphysical belief in nature as a space of unity and integration, serving as a model to culture and to the politics of difference. Donna Haraway’s ‘Cyborg Manifesto’ (1985;1991), explicitly rejects the unity of the body, the metaphysical bliss of nature, the essential truth of femininity. Careful in exploring the new sets of power in the cybernetic age, Haraway does not hesitate to emphazise the deviations that the cyborg offers to the linearity of reproduction and sameness.33 Haraway’s cyborg expresses antipathy for Marxist idealism and for the claustrophobic triangle of identification rooted in the Oedipal complex. The cyborg shows no nostalgia for the model of exchange and reproduction, reality and pleasure.***pg34
The flow of codes traversing a body no longer defines the essence of form and the aims of sexual organic functions. Rather, it puts into contact a body with another body alongside non-linear transmission of information. With cybernetics, as Haraway puts it: ‘[b]iological organisms have become biotic systems, communication devices like others’(1991: 177–8). The identification of women with nature, stemming from ideals of creation, motherhood, emotion and spontaneity, and opposed to the artifice and rationality of men, has for too long colonized the understanding of sexual difference, providing a symbolic model for gender.***pg34
[Haraway's] work challenges the patrilinear system of evolution with descent embedded in colonialism and capitalism, refuting the ontological meta- physics of the one and the multiple.***pg34
There is no innocent shelter for women to return to. Haraway argues that the scientific association of sex with reproduction is central to the ontology of the modern subject.***pg35
This organism establishes a model for modern bio-politics, the incarnation of the transcendent Self/I into an already given body.***pg35
This ontological model draws on the semiotics of cybernetics, immunology and genetics that arrange phenomena of incorporation through flexible boundaries of exclusion, opposition, access and resistance.***pg35
The cyborg proposes a post-gender body politics of transversal coalitions and alliances, emerging out of affinities, rather than identities, among bodies as a ‘poetic/political unity without relying on a logic of appropriation, incorporation, and taxonomic identification’ (1991: 157).***pg35
the pragmatics of affect is a pragmatics of desire whose tendencies of composition are induced by encounters between the most different modes. This desire is machinic as it entails the association of heterogeneous particle-forces running at different speeds and entering different kinds of relations. Far from being primarily repressed, desire ceaselessly flows and produces modes of power that are neither primarily good nor bad.***pg37
Essence is no longer relegated to the transcendent morality of depth and a priority, but is produced by an immanent relation between the explication of intensities and the construction of encounters between bodies. Insofar as desire involves positive productions and joyful encounters constituting a phylum of relations between substance and modes, Spinoza’s ethics also includes sadness and poison as ethical dimensions. The difference is that these are merely reactive responses to the desire of encounters. In this sense, fascistic desire is a dimension of desire, a reactive dimension in the incessant flow of production where desire lends itself to the production of death.***pg37
The Spinozian explanation for sadness and evil corresponds to a biophysical reaction to poison spreading from encounters between chemically altered bodies or from the molar aggregation of molecules able to diffuse a micro-fascism that expands on the most minute dynamics of order.***pg38
‘[W]e do not endeavor, will, seek after or desire because we judge a thing to be good. On the contrary, we judge a thing to be good because we endeavor, will, seek after and desire it’ (Ethics, III, 9, scholium). Desire should never be subjectivized. It is always already part of a composition, a machinic assemblage, the encounter and the collision of particles and forces. The subject is an appendix to the machine in desire, an accessory that does not determine ethical relations but only positions of will. Desire is detracted from individual pleasure and climactic purposes to become part of a machine in production: an endosymbiotic multiplicity. On the Spinozian immanent plane of nature, essence becomes an intensive modification of substance, the proliferation of a joyful desire that changes through the encounters with other modifications or modes. The emergence of a singular mode defines the preservation of essence in existence, the intensive extension of potential – or conatus. The essence of a body is not defined by its properties but by its power to connect or not with other bodies, to assemble to create a more powerful body, to merge to increase or decrease potential. Such an intensive essence maps a multiplicity of levels of transmission that operate at parallel times and spaces and construct new modes of connection.***pg38
Sex is disentangled from genital sex and sexual reproduction, the symbolic representation of sexual difference. Sex is abstracted from the already sexed body to proliferate through infective transmission, molecular contacts. Sex no longer individuates the body but becomes a machinic construction of a multiplicity of modes of information transmission. Sex is transductive: it webs bodies of all sorts, exposing the power or desire of a body to become in a network of matrices. Femininity no longer remains specific to one mode of sex. It is not localized in one body or another, in one composition or another. It is not an identity, an individual unity. Feminine desire can only be defined by a pack of relations where microfeminine particle-forces spread at every kinetic and affective encounter.38 These relations produce a micropolitics of becoming where particle-forces combine or disintegrate, activate or react against new encounters. These relations enable the construction of a molecular ethics of affect that flees away from the politics of representation. The latter congeals the micro- changes of relations into one structural aggregate that is erected as a delegate of multiplicity. Macropolitics will always ask femininity to represent the subject woman and biological sex to represent desire. Yet molecular dynamics of power are not subsumed to their molar organization, but remain consistent with their effects. Micropolitics ceaselessly breaks through despotic aggregates with incorporeal lines of differentiation. Lines of flight, as Deleuze and Guattari argue, are not reactive to molar or macro organizations. Rather they are leaking flows that are prior to and independent of structures of organization. Organizations emerge from flowing flows and not the other way around. Macropolitics only corresponds to one of the levels of organization of micropolitical compositions of desire–power that affect – and transform – the very constitution of macropolitical projects. Micropolitics, then, involves the becoming-molecular of femininity, the consistent – synthetic – production of machinic desire that destra- tifies (swerves from) the Oedipal woman, organic sex and filiative reproduction by constructing a collective body–sex, letting desire run parallel in all dimensions of communication and reproduction without isolating sex from the rest.***pg39
This is a micropolitics that diffuses beneath the binarism of masculinity and femininity to traverse all compositions and proliferate in all spheres: biophysical, socio-cultural, politico-economic, techno-scientific. Deleuze and Guattari also define this micropolitics as involving the construction of ‘mo-lecular sexes’ or ‘n-1 sexes’ at each encounter of bodies: the intensive expansion of desiring flows reaching critical phases of mutations by composing and decomposing assemblages between the most unnatural bodies. Far from being a spontaneous force, microfeminine particle-forces emerge from non-linear relations between the potential and the actual desire–power of essence involving singular modifications of reproduction and communication in the process of stratification of sex.***pg40
Micropolitics requires the engineering of abstract sex (symbiotic desire) where bodies of connection are not determined by the identity of sex but by incorporeal mutations of desire or the machinic compositions of essence (difference).***pg41
